1. Prerequisites
Before you start, ensure you have Node.js installed (version 18, 20, or 22+ is recommended).

Check your version: node -v

Use Visual Studio Code (VS Code) for the best experience.

2. Initialize the Project
The easiest way to set everything up (including TypeScript config) is the official initializer.

Open your terminal and create a new directory:

Bash
mkdir playwright-automation && cd playwright-automation
Run the installer:

Bash
npm init playwright@latest
Choose these options when prompted:

Language: TypeScript

Name of your tests folder: tests

Add a GitHub Actions workflow? Yes (recommended for CI/CD)

Install Playwright browsers? Yes

3. Understand the File Structure
Playwright scaffolds a clean structure for you:

playwright.config.ts: The "brain." Configure browsers (Chromium, Firefox, WebKit), timeouts, and base URLs here.

tests/: Where your .spec.ts files live.

tests-examples/: Contains a demo todo app test (great for learning).

package.json: Manages scripts and dependencies.

4. Running your tests
Command	                            What it does
npx playwright test	                Runs all tests in "headless" mode (invisible, fast).
npx playwright test --headed	    Runs tests and opens the browser so you can watch.
npx playwright test --ui	        Best for Dev: Opens a UI with "time-travel" debugging.
npx playwright show-report	        Opens a beautiful HTML report of the last run.

5. Pro Tips for 2026
Use the VS Code Extension: Search for "Playwright Test" by Microsoft in the marketplace. It lets you run tests by clicking a green "Play" button next to your code.

Codegen: Don't write every locator by hand. Run npx playwright codegen https://example.com to record your actions and generate the TypeScript code automatically.

Page Object Model (POM): As your suite grows, move your locators into separate classes to keep your tests readable and maintainable.

Skip the any type: Since you're using TypeScript, let the IDE help you. Use the built-in types like Page, Locator, and Response.